---
layout: book
title: The Chip - How Two Americans Invented the Microchip and Launched a Revolution 
author: T.R. Reid
score: 4
cover: /images/books/thechipcover.jpg
published: October 9, 2001
publisher: Random House Trade Paperbacks
---

While electrical engineering and physics are two fields I have little formal education in, I've always enjoyed learning more about them, especially as they pertain to computers. So I picked up <i>The Chip</i> with the hopes of learning more about the inner workings of microchips as well as the people who helped create what is arguably the greatest invention of the 20th century. I was not disappointed. <i>The Chip</i> managed to find a good balance between the technical and the narrative to craft an engaging story. While there were some missed opportunities to dive deeper into the technical, the primary goal of this book was to offer a historical perspective on the evolution of a critical piece of technology and to that it definitely delivered.

<h2>The Tyranny of Numbers</h2>
Before the transistor, for a good 50 years, electronic devices were built with vacuum tubes. Vacuum tubes served as both an amplifier for the electric current passing through it as well as the essential "on/off" fuction required for the logical functions essential to computers (think binary and boolean). Unfortunately, vacuum tubes were large, fragile, and power hungry devices that got incredibly hot. Engineers had to keep the limitations of vacuum tubes in mind when designing circuits to prevent hardware from melting due to the incredible heat pouring off of these tubes. Fun fact: The warmth and glow of the tubes also constantly attracted moths and other insects to the delicate innards of the computer causing short circuits. Maintenance of these systems required constant "debugging", coining the popular term still used to refer to the process of fixing a computer.

The transistor was invented in 1947 by a group at Bell Labs and quickly replaced vacuum tubes as the superior technology. Transistors provide the same key functions as vacuum tubes--amplifying a signal and rapid on-off switching--by moving electronic charges along controlled paths inside a block of semiconductor material like silicon or germanium. Transistors are lighter, smaller, and over 20 times faster than vacuum tubes. With the transistor entering the scene, the potential of circuits was finally fully unleashed. 

There are four primary components which can be combined in a variety of ways to make a circuit:
<ul>
<li>The Resistor - restricts the flow of electricity to provide the circuit designer with precise control of the current at any given point</li> 
<li>The Capacitor - absorbs electrical energy and can then release when triggered</li>
<li>The Diode -  blocks the current under some conditions and allows the current to flow under others</li>
<li>The Transistor - turns current flow on and off, sending digital signals over the circuit</li>
</ul>

Because of the transistor's amplifying effects, a circuit can be as large and complex as you want, made of almost any combination of the above components. The more complex the task the circuit is performing, the more components it needs. A circuit can easily require thousands if not millions of these components to perform the type of complex tasks that were only able to be read about in science fiction in the 1950s. The key, however, is that the circuit must be complete and unbroken in order to effectively pass the electronic current on to the next node in the circuit. If any one of these components in the circuit fails, the circuit is broken and the entire system fails. 

So while on paper engineers could dream up the most complex and beautiful circuits their minds could imagine, the act of manufacturing these systems was complex, arduous and rife with bugs. At the time there was no machine capable of automatically building out these complex circuits, each individual component had to be sodered by hand to a wire connecting it to the next component. The industry quickly realized that this technology was limited by what was referred to as the "tyranny of numbers". The more components you add to a circuit the more advanced your product, but also the more likely your product would be to never get off the manufacturing floor due to constant component failures and set backs. The computers we have today which have millions of components and interconnections, would be impossible to mass produce with these methods. Fun fact: Women were hired in droves to do the meticulous job of wiring these circuits because the "size of their hands were more suited to the job". Ugh.

<h2>The Microchip</h2>
Thus a race to solve the "tyranny of numbers" problem began throughout the industry. <i>The Chip</i> follows two men who ended up separately developing the same solution to the problem. First was Jack Kilby, an electrical engineer working at Texas Instruments in their semiconductor research group. The other was Robert Noyce, a physicist in the early days of building his own company in what is today known as Silicon Valley in San Francisco.

In 1959, both of these men, only a few months apart came to the same conclusion that would lead to the birth of the microchip: connecting multiple devices on a single piece of silicon in order to make interconnections part of the manufacturing process to drasticlly reduce the cost, weight and size of each element.

<h2>Fun Facts</h2>
One of the great things about reading a book that is focusing on a historical perspective are some of the fun facts you get out of it:
Debugging
Women wired transistors because their hands were small enough (bullshit)

<h2>Historical Timeline</h2>
1880s: Edison hated scientests, referring to them as the "bulge-headed fraternity of the Savanic world". He didn't persue vacuum tubes as conductor for electricity because he didn't see the use in it. Arguably, he was right. Vacuum tubes were a very limited technology, but they got us going in the early years before the transistor was discovered. Edison proved an electric current could traverse a vacuum but considered it a parlour trick. He only cared about inventions that made him money, a true American.
J.J. Thomson of Cambridge discovered the electron from experimenting on Edison's vacuum tube electric current. Electric current is a flow of electrons.
J.A. Fleming developed a reliable rectifier for radio transmissions, taking the alternating current traveling over the air and converting it to a direct current which could be used by the device. Used the vacuum tube for this.

