---
layout: book
type: Book Review
title: The Chip - How Two Americans Invented the Microchip and Launched a Revolution 
author: T.R. Reid
score: 4
cover: /images/books/thechipcover.jpg
published: October 9, 2001
publisher: Random House Trade Paperbacks
---

While electrical engineering and physics are two fields I have little formal education in, I've always enjoyed learning more about them, especially as they pertain to computers. So I picked up <i>The Chip</i> with the hopes of learning more about the inner workings of microchips as well as the people who helped create what is arguably the greatest invention of the 20th century. I was not disappointed. <i>The Chip</i> managed to find a good balance between the technical and the narrative to craft an engaging story. While there were some missed opportunities to dive deeper into the technical, the primary goal of this book was to offer a historical perspective on the evolution of a critical piece of technology and to that it definitely delivered.

<i>The Chip</i> follows Jack Kilby an electrical engineer at Texas Instruments and Robert Noyce, working or one of the first startups in Silicon Valley at the time and eventual co-founder of Intel, in a race to develop, patent, and monetize a solution the <a href="/2017/05/20/microchip/">"tyranny of numbers"</a> problem that was plaguing electronics at the time. In 1959, both of these men, only a few months apart came to the same conclusion that would lead to the birth of the integrated circuit (i.e. microchip): connecting multiple devices on a single piece of silicon in order to make interconnections part of the manufacturing process to drasticlly reduce the cost, weight and size of each element. 

From there the book follows each individual's respective company's rush to get a patent out on this critical technology and the ensuing decade long battle over patent rights (which ended up going to Noyce whose patent was more comprehensive and accurate than Kilby's rushed submission before the idea had been fully fleshed out). By the time the patent fight was officially resolved, the production of semiconductor chips was already a multibillion-dollar industry. The quick adoption of this new technology can be entirely attributed to the space race. Initially, a way to mass produce these chips had not been invented yet. The technology struggled for two years on the production floor and the chips that were produced were cost-prohibitive to use for any kind of consumer product. Fortunately, with the dawn of the space race, suddenly there was a buyer out there willing to spend any amount of money for something small, light, and reliable to send man to the moon. With this steady cashflow, production of the circuit was perfected.

Gordon Moore, a friend of Robert Noyce's, made an off-the-cuff prediction in 1964 that the number of transistors capable of being placed on a chip would double every three years. This glib predicition, now referred to as Moore's Law, has held true all the way up to the 21st century. With the decline in production cost and the steady incline in capacity, the semiconductor industry has proven to be the most productive in American industrial history. The world as we once knew it was forever changed by this technology. Texas Instruments, in fact, made the first microchip run product to completely revolutionize our way of life: the calculator. Within the first decade after the calculator hit the market in 1965, the slide rule had become nothing more than a museum piece and calculators were as pervasive in society as the modern computer is today. 

All in all, Reid offers a great perspective on how various inventions and discoveries have evolved overtime to culminate in this great triumph of human ingenuity. <i>The Chip</i> makes sure to give credit where credit's due, touching on all the greats including Edison, Turing, Boole, Shannon and more, and fitting them together to demonstrate how technology builds and evolves through the years. None of the technology we have today would be possible without the diligent work of those who have come before us. While I sometimes found the pacing of this book odd and the jumps between topics clunky, overall this book was a fun read and I highly recommend it.
